GristConnect {: .tag-ee }
============

Discourse is popular forum software made to be integrated with many sites
(including [our own](https://community.getgrist.com)).  It is annoying
if users need a login for a forum that is separate to their login on
the rest of a site. The protocol Discourse created for solving this
is quite well done and is called 
[DiscourseConnect](https://meta.discourse.org/t/discourseconnect-official-single-sign-on-for-discourse-sso/13045).
We decided to have Grist support the same protocol, so any software
that has plugins for letting Discourse use its logins (such as WordPress)
can also let Grist use its logins. This isn't an official standard so
we called our implementation of it "GristConnect" rather than
"DiscourseConnect".

Setting up GristConnect requires some settings for Grist, and a plugin or
custom coding for your site or SSO. The Grist settings are as follows:

  * `GRIST_CONNECT_URL`: setting this environment variable will enable GristConnect. It should be an URL address of an external site where users will be redirected on login/signup request.
  * `GRIST_CONNECT_SECRET`: (required) a secret key, used to sign (hash) query parameters in URLs used during login flow. 
  * `GRIST_CONNECT_LOGOUT_URL`: (optional) an URL address users will be redirected to after signing out. By default - Grist's existing sign-out page.
  * `GRIST_CONNECT_ENDPOINT`: (optional) a callback endpoint exposed by Grist where users should be redirected to after a successful login attempt in the external Identity Provider site (default value: `/connect/login`).

For your site or SSO, you may find that the software you use supports
DiscourseConnect, in which case you can enable that and coordinate with the
Grist settings. Otherwise, here are the exact details of what needs to happen:

  * When users try to login into Grist, they are redirected to a `GRIST_CONNECT_URL` with signed query parameters, for example, `https://auth-provider.example.com?sso=PAYLOADBASE64&sig=cAlculateDHash`
  * The payload is a Base64 encoded query string containing:
    - `nonce` - a one time token generated by Grist
    - `return_url` - a URL to redirect the user to after successful login - this always will be set to the full Grist URL for `GRIST_CONNECT_ENDPOINT`.
  * User should sign in using the `GRIST_CONNECT_URL` login screen.
  * An external provider should create a new url-encoded payload with the following parameters
    - `nonce` - (required) a token that was sent from Grist
    - `external_id` - (required) any string that is unique to the user and will never change
    - `email` - (required) a valid user email
    - `name` - (required) a user name
    - `avatar_url` - (optional) an URL to user’s profile photo. Note that Grist will also accept `picture` parameter for the same purpose.
    - This payload should be base64 encoded and properly escaped to be a valid query string.
  * A provider should calculate a HMAC_SHA256 hash of a payload.
  * A user should redirect to the `GRIST_CONNECT_ENDPOINT` endpoint with a signed query string parameters, for example, `https://grist.customhost.com/connect/login?sso=ENCODEDPAYLOD&sig=HASH`
  * Grist will create a new user or update an existing one. Users will be identified by *external_id* parameter.
  * The user will be signed into Grist.
